## Introduction

Temperament-Math: calculate variegated circulating tuning temperaments.

Copyright (C) 2021 Mark D. Blackwell

## Usage

`ruby lib/TemperamentMath/calculate.rb`

Enter the generated tuning values into your tuner.
For example, I use Stichting Huygens-Fokker's program, Scala, to tune my harpsichord.

To generate more temperaments,
you can adjust the variables `fifth_max` and `fifth_min`,
found near the top of the program.

This program is known to work with version 2.7.0p0 (of Ruby).

## Explanation

In all the tuning temperaments generated by the program,
the major thirds are variegated.

In particular,
as each major third forms part of a major key's tonic chord,
each major third's tuning width increases
along with the number of sharps or flats in the key signature.
This resembles Thomas Young's first temperament.

Unlike Young's, however,
the sharp keys' major thirds are closer to just
than in the corresponding flat keys,
which produces increased variety.
(Thomas Young had them the same.)

And also unlike Young's,
the sharp keys are favored over the flat keys.

This improves the sound of the
major dominant chords of the commonly-used minor keys, such as
E-major for A-minor, A-major for D-minor,
B-major for E-minor, etc.

Also unlike Young's,
the major third, CE here is perfectly just.

## Notes on the program

x-sub-i is a numbered perfect fifth in the circle of fifths, rising to G, D, etc.:

x1 x2 x3 x4 x5 x6 x7 x8 x9 x10 x11 x12
G  D  A  E  B  F# C# G# D# A#  F   C

In this program, they are called @@fifth_1, etc.

n-sub-i is a numbered major third in the circle of fifths, again rising to G, D, etc.:

1    2    3    4    5    6    6    5    4     3    2     1
n4 < n5 < n3 < n6 < n2 < n7 < n1 < n8 < n12 < n9 < n11 < n10
E    B    A    F#   D    C#   G    G#   C     D#   F     A#

In this program, they are called @@third_1, etc.

The first line of numbers is the level number.

## License

GNU Affero General Public License, Version 3 (see [LICENSE](./LICENSE)).
